---
layout: post
title: "Identity in Overabundance: Self and Lack Thereof in Kierkegaard and Capitalism"
hidden: true
---

*This essay was written for the 2015 summer course "Kierkegard: The Individual in Global Society" at the University of Copenhagen.*

It's notoriously difficult to find a consistent “self” or author in Kierkegaard's works, as his use of pseudonyms and irony often obscures what his own view actually is. In *Either/Or*, behind the pseudonyms of A and B (whose real name is Wilhelm), Kierkegaard argues for the merits of both the aesthetic and ethical lifestyles, respectively. It is not difficult to imagine that he sympathized with both. This question of multiple sides to one's self is touched upon by A in the chapter *Crop Rotation*, and Kierkegaard implicitly explores it in his collected authorship. The question of multiple aspects to one's identity is increasingly relevant for contemporary capitalist culture. My goal is to demonstrate how A's thoughts on identity are taken to their extreme in present-day “youth culture” and how this can fuel consumer capitalism, with constant reference to the contemporary trend called “normcore”.

## Crop Rotation
In *Crop Rotation*, Kierkegaard's pseudonym A works from the axiom that all people are “kedsommelige” (EE1 275). This Danish word is often translated as “boring”, but its noun form [kedsommelighed] encapsulates both boringness and boredom - perhaps a more accurate translation would be “tedious”. He argues that it is not idleness that is the root of all evil, but tedium – idleness can be a marvellous thing! If tediousness is the root of all evil, attempts to overcome it are only natural. A's solution to this is through “crop rotation”. This can have two meanings. The first is to rotate the soil, or, leaving the crop metaphor behind, to change one's surroundings. When you get bored of your hometown, you move to the city; when you get bored of the city, you move to a new country; and so on. This is the “vulgar, unartistic” (EE1 281) method that is most commonly used, in spite of the fact that changing one's surroundings will never be an effective way of fighting tedium as it can continue indefinitely. Instead, A suggests changing the method of cultivation and the crops themselves:

> *“one must also continually vary oneself; this is the secret. For this, it is necessary to have control over one's moods. In the sense of being able to generate them at will, this is an impossibility, but wisdom learns to utilize the moment. […] One must know how a mood affects oneself and is likely to affect others before taking it on.”* (EE1 287, own translation)

In other words, tedium (and thus evil) is combated by changing one's self and one's moods. These changes happen through the control of recalling and forgetting. To recall poetically, we must be aware of how we enjoy – because if we get lost in too much enjoyment, the memory of this overfeeding will haunt us. We will lose the ability to recall or forget at will, and it is this ability that allows us to rotate the crops and live artistically, without tedium (EE1 282).

This implies a meta-awareness of, and ironic distance to, one's life. This ironic distance is embraced throughout A's part of <i>Either/Or</i>, and later criticized by B (or Wilhelm) in the second part. As soon as there is irony, it becomes difficult to place anything A writes – for any given passage, the reader can't be certain that A would sincerely stand behind it, and it's even less clear whether Kierkegaard would. In this way, just a bit of ironic distance can give the ironist a large amount of freedom – if you know that they don't mean what they're saying, there is the potential for them to mean anything! A's lack of commitment to a self, to making choices, and to ethics means that his potential is almost infinite. By committing, he would have “everything to lose, nothing to gain” (EE1 286). Instead, he has nothing to lose and everything to gain. If we can speak of any commitment in A's text, it must be a commitment to non-commitment – but this is, after all, still a negative form.

## Youth and Normcore
It is perhaps this negative freedom that appeals to youth, and that makes the dynamic between A and B reminiscent of that between a (responsible) adult scolding a young man. A's half of <i>Either/Or</i> will resonate with the current younger generation, and not only because he doesn't write about responsibility and things that are usually seen as contrasting with youth. For one, irony is trendy – just look at the prevalence of hipsters and the near-endless supply on think pieces on them. Millennials read satirical websites like <i>The Onion</i>, watch ironic TV shows (such as <i>30 Rock</i> and <i>The Colbert Report</i>) and follow artists like Andy Warhol and Jeff Koons. But irony is not the most interesting aspect of A in relation to millennials. Rather, it's the discussion of identity, <i>Crop Rotation</i> in particular.

Identities are becoming more fluid and are fitting less into the stereotypical moulds that we are used to. A culture in which irony is common, coupled with easy access to thousands upon thousands of communities online has made it easy for the Internet generation to explore different subcultures and their corresponding identities. A good elucidation of this was put forward by a trend forecasting group called K-HOLE. Their report is written in marketing-language and focuses heavily on “coolness”, but it is not all style over substance. The report, titled Youth Mode, explains that today's consumers want to experience all the different (and yes, quite possibly inconsistent) sides to their identity (particularly through their consumer choices, but not exclusively so). They dub this trend “normcore”:
